KEP-3101: Allow enforcing 1:1 pod to node assignment. (#3098)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3101-pod-to-node-assignment/README.md

-->

#### Story 1

A user wants a Pod to be scheduled alone on a node to avoid them from contending
on resources (e.g. claiming all CPU cores available on a node). In other words,
resource intensive workloads are needed to be scheduled on separate nodes.

#### Story 2

As a user, I want to deploy a Spark or MPI job such that only a single worker is
running on each pod excluding daemonsets.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

Users might be able to circumvent 1:1 pod to node assignments by creating a
daemonset with node affinity to a specific node.

#### Possible Mitigations

-   Prevent users from creating daemonsets using a
    [ResourceQuota](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)
    -   Object count quota (`count/daemonsets`) can be used for this purpose.
-   Restrict daemonsets creation to admins/specific users via kubernetes

>     [RBAC](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)

Reviewer: it is fairly the same mitigation: prevent users from creating daemonsets, so merge them into one and mention that an admin could either use RBAC or ResourceQuota to do that.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The idea is to create a scheduler filter plugin such that given a pod and a
node, a node is filtered out (as in considered no fit for the pod) if any of the
following is true (assume the API is the annotation k8s.io/pod-per-node=true):

> -   The incoming pod is not a daemonset pod (by checking OwnerReference) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The incoming pod is not a daemonset or static pod (by checking OwnerReference) and
```

while this doesn't apply to the scheduler since the scheduler shouldn't be scheduling static pods, it applies to Kubelet since it will be importing the same logic.

    there is a pod with k8s.io/pod-per-node=true already assigned to the node,
-   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node
    hosts at least one non daemonset pod or a static pod.
-   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet
    tests on pod admission. This will prevent users from working around the
    scheduler to avoid 1:1 enforcement.

The annotation is not a proper API, so the next section proposes what the API
should look like in the pod spec.

### Introduce a new API Field

A new API field `pod.spec.podsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy` could be introduced to be
used by the new filter. The value for the newly introduced field could be an
enum that has one of the following values:
`SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods`, `Many` (Default) where `Many` is the
same as the current behaviour and `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` would
enforce 1:1 pod to node mapping during scheduling of a given pod.

```yaml
...
spec:

>   nodeAssignmentPolicy: <string>

Reviewer: update this

- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

-   Unit and integration tests passing.
-   Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
-   Benchmark tests showing no performance problems.
-   No user complaints regarding performance/correctness.

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

-   Still no complaints regarding performance.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

In the event of a downgrade, the `k8s.io/pod-per-node=true` annotation will be

> ignored even if it was set to true.

Reviewer: Mention the following:
1. While the feature flag is disabled, the the field will be ignored by the api-server and will not be stored in etcd.
2. Not setting the new field will maintain the old behavior on both upgrade and downgrade of the control plane.
3. Setting the field after upgrading and while the feature flag is enabled will allow users to make use of the feature.
4. downgrading after upgrade or disabling the feature flag will 
  4.1 maintain previously set values in the field on existing pods, but they will have no effect. 
  4.2 disable the scheduler filter, and so the cluster may end up in a state where there are pods with `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` previously assigned to nodes, and those nodes after the downgrade will now be allowed to fit "worker" pods. This situation will not be fixed after a subsequent upgrade, node drain is required to fix that.

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.

> -->

Reviewer: If Kubelet is running a version older than the control plane, and the version has the feature disabled, the predicate will not be enforced on pod admission.

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.
-->

-   [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>     -   Feature gate name: `PodPerNode`

Reviewer: lets use the same name as the API field for the feature flag: `PodsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy`

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

It should not impact already running workloads. This is an opt-in feature since
users need to explicitly set the annotation and the API feature in pod spec. If
the feature is disabled, this feature will be silently ignored even if it's
already set.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.? No.

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->

> ### Monitoring Requirements

Author: Noted, what is the difference between critical error keywords and scheduler regular failures. 

Are they logs at certain level (critical error keywords) and errors returned by the scheduler? Accordingly keywords mentioned here should be considered in the implementation?

> ### Monitoring Requirements

Reviewer: just use the first bullet related to the metric, logs shouldn't be used as SLIs for SLOs.

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

> ###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

Reviewer: by checking if the new field is set.

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> ###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Reviewer: check if there is only one pod with `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` set running on the nodes (other than daemonset and static pods).

-->

#### Story 1

A user wants a Pod to be scheduled alone on a node to avoid them from contending
on resources (e.g. claiming all CPU cores available on a node). In other words,
resource intensive workloads are needed to be scheduled on separate nodes.

Example: As a user, I want to deploy a Spark or MPI job such that only a single
worker is running on each pod excluding daemonsets.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

Users might be able to circumvent 1:1 pod to node assignments by creating a
daemonset with node affinity to a specific node.

#### Possible Mitigations

-   Cluster admins can use one of the following to prevent users from creating
    daemonsets
    -   [ResourceQuota](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)
        -   Object count quota (`count/daemonsets`) can be used for this
            purpose.
    -   kubernetes

>         [RBAC](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) to

Author: Thanks for spotting this out, updated.

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The idea is to create a scheduler filter plugin such that given a pod and a
node, a node is filtered out (as in considered no fit for the pod) if any of the
following is true (assume the API is the annotation k8s.io/pod-per-node=true):

-   The incoming pod is not a daemonset pod or static pod (by checking
    OwnerReference) and there is a pod with k8s.io/pod-per-node=true already
    assigned to the node,
-   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node
    hosts at least one non daemonset pod or a static pod.
-   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet
    tests on pod admission. This will prevent users from working around the
    scheduler to avoid 1:1 enforcement.

The annotation is not a proper API, so the next section proposes what the API
should look like in the pod spec.

### Introduce a new API Field

> A new API field `pod.spec.podsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy` could be introduced to be

Reviewer: I am thinking that this name and type are fairly long, perhaps `CoexistPolicy` is another option. Coexist is kind of a "toleration", which is what this feature is about, a special type of toleration, and the semantics is: what other pods a pod can coexist with on the same node. And so `Many` -> `Any`, and `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` -> `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`

Author: yes, `CoexistPolicy` sounds much better. Updated.

used by the new filter. The value for the newly introduced field could be an
enum that has one of the following values:
`SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods`, `Many` (Default) where `Many` is the
same as the current behaviour and `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` would
enforce 1:1 pod to node mapping during scheduling of a given pod.

> ```yaml

Reviewer: lets use golang to better define the API:

```go
type PodSpec struct {
  CoexistPolicy CoexistPolicy 
}

// +enum
type CoexistPolicy string

const (
	// Pod tolerates co-existing with other pods.
	CoexistPolicyAny CoexistPolicy = "Any"
	// Pod tolerates coexisting with daemonset and static pods only.
	CoexistPolicyDaemonsetAndStaticPods CoexistPolicy = "DaemonsetAndStaticPods"
)

```

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

Unit and integration tests verifying the following

-   a single pod is assigned to a node while allowing daemonsets and static
    pods.
-   scheduler doesn't schedule new pods to a node that already have a pod with
    `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy
-   kubelet rejects a pod if it was assigned directly to a node already running
    a pod with `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy
-   the API is no-op if feature gate is turned off

Benchmark Tests

> -   Verify that performance is better that using inter-pod anti-affinity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Verify that performance is better than using inter-pod anti-affinity
```

  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

In the event of a downgrade, the `k8s.io/pod-per-node=true` annotation will be
ignored even if it was set to true.

More specifically

-   While the feature flag is disabled, the the field will be ignored by the
    api-server and will not be stored in etcd.
-   Not setting the new field will maintain the old behavior on both upgrade and
    downgrade of the control plane.
-   Setting the field after upgrading and while the feature flag is enabled will
    allow users to make use of the feature.
-   Downgrading after upgrade or disabling the feature flag will
    -   maintain previously set values in the field on existing pods, but they
        will have no effect.
    -   disable the scheduler filter, and so the cluster may end up in a state
        where there are pods with `SingleExcludingDaemonsetAndStaticPods`
        previously assigned to nodes, and those nodes after the downgrade will

>         now be allowed to fit "worker" pods. This situation will not be fixed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        now be allowed to fit other pods that wouldn't have fit while the feature is enabled. This situation will not be fixed
```

        after a subsequent upgrade, node drain is required to fix that. ###

>         Version Skew Strategy

Reviewer: header got moved to the previous line

updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

This Kep proposes adding a feature (`PodsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy`) that provides
users with an explicit API and scheduler support for 1:1 pod to node assignment.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Customers trying to deploy batch workloads on Kubernetes have filed multiple
requests (See [1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/68827),
[2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105287) for details) for 1:1
pod-to-node assignment. The most common use case for enforcing 1:1 pod to node
assignment is HPC workloads (MPI and Spark).

Currently there are two approaches to achieve this:

-   Set resource requests to something high enough to prevent scheduling any

>     other pods but daemonset pods. This is tricky to do and error prone,

Reviewer 2: Missed static pod as `design details` mentioned below, should we replenish it?

Author: added "static pods" in multiple occurences where deamonset pods where only mentioned as the excluded type.

    especially for smaller nodes. This will not be possible if node size is not
    known in advance.
-   Use pod anti affinity. Users will need to define the same set of labels on
    all pods that needs to be repelled, whether or not they actually request 1:1
    pod to node assignment, it is also expensive to calculate especially for

>     cluster autoscaler.

Reviewer 3: Or set pod.spec.nodeName when the pod is created and deal with kubelet rejection?

Author: My understanding is that this want prevent other pods from being scheduled on this node, and thus wouldn't achieve the same goal of enforcing 1:1 pod to node mapping. Is this correct?

Reviewer: we can continue the the API review on the PR.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a new pod-level API that allows users to specify how many "worker" pods are
allowed on a node. The API is implemented by the scheduler as a filter plugin
and kubelet as an admission predicate.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

A user wants a Pod to be scheduled alone on a node to avoid them from contending
on resources (e.g. claiming all CPU cores available on a node). In other words,
resource intensive workloads are needed to be scheduled on separate nodes.

Example: As a user, I want to deploy a Spark or MPI job such that only a single

> worker is running on each pod excluding daemonsets.

Reviewer 3: I can't tell from here, but it *sounds* like you want to run a Job that guarantees node exclusion (the items in this job run a number of pods that satisfy `min(nodesMatchingCriteria, numberOfReplicasRequested)`?

From an enhancement level perspective, I'm trying to understand the tradeoffs you need.  Could you add some of the properties you expect a solution to have in this section (like a list of criteria you expect to be true), and the use case that drives each property?  That helps me review, thank you!

Reviewer: The use case is this: I want to run a single **workload** pod per node. One example is MPI or Spark: each MPI/Spark worker should be scheduled on a separate node alone; the only other pods allowed on the node are daemonsets (because they are used as node agents that serve a horizontal feature, like logging and monitoring)

Reviewer 4: If there is not have availiable node for this workload pod, will this plugin evict other pod in some node?

Reviewer: Yes if the incoming pod has higher priority

Reviewer 4: OK, this should be clear in this KEP.

Reviewer: Preemption applies to all filters, but doesn't hurt clarifying that in the doc.

Author: I added information about preemption in Design details section

- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

-   Unit and integration tests passing.
-   Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
-   Benchmark tests showing no performance problems.
-   No user complaints regarding performance/correctness.

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

-   Still no complaints regarding performance.
-   Ensure feature documentation is clear and complete.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

In the event of a downgrade, the `k8s.io/pod-per-node=true` annotation will be
ignored even if it was set to true.

More specifically

> -   While the feature flag is disabled, the the field will be ignored by the

Reviewer 2: duplicated word `the`.

requests (See [1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/68827),
[2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105287) for details) for 1:1
pod-to-node assignment. The most common use case for enforcing 1:1 pod to node
assignment is HPC workloads (MPI and Spark).

Currently there are two approaches to achieve this:

-   Set resource requests to something high enough to prevent scheduling any
    other pods but daemonset and static pods. This is tricky to do and error
    prone, especially for smaller nodes. This will not be possible if node size
    is not known in advance.
-   Use pod anti affinity. Users will need to define the same set of labels on
    all pods that needs to be repelled, whether or not they actually request 1:1
    pod to node assignment, it is also expensive to calculate especially for
    cluster autoscaler.

A simple and native way to force 1:1 pod-to-node assignment is therefore needed.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

-   Allow users to force 1:1 pod-to-node assignment for a given pod

> 

Reviewer: sg, i think we should simply phrase it as: this feature is implemented as a filter, and so features associated with filters applies to it like preemption and autoscaling.

### Non-Goals

> -   Find the best fit node for a given pod

Author: Would this be a better wording

```
Find the best fit node for a given pod from nodes that satisfy `pod.spec.CoexistPolicy` 
```

> -   Find the best fit node for a given pod

Author: sg! updated.

> 

Author: Could you please elaborate on the first half? Since we are not adding any preemption logic, I am not sure what should we be documenting here.

For the second half, I added a second bullet point stating that it's a non-goal to avoid those pods from getting preempted.

> 

Reviewer: Wei, i am not sure i understand as well, wouldn't it be simpler to just say that this is treated just like any other filter, there is nothing special about it.

> 

Reviewer 5: Oh, I meant if we'd like to **not** favor the pod with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy when it's evaluated as a preepmption candidate (suppose there are multiple preemption options). For example, to schedule a high-priority pod-X, possible preemption options are:

1. preempt a regular pod-1 on node-A
2. preempt a pod-2 with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy on node-B

My point is that, in current defaultpreemption logic, it's random to pick pod-1 or pod-2 as the final preemption, but maybe we can prefer to protect pod-2 more  as it may not have a good chance to be scheduled next time (due to its coexist policy). Generally, make a pod with coexist policy less disruptive upon premmption can make the feature more useful.

We may or may not pursue it, just write it down to manage the user's expectation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Or if we just skip the preemption of `pod-per-node` named pod, since the landed node is very likely be picked as the candidate node(according to `pickOneNodeForPreemption` rule, like 
```
  // 1. A node with minimum number of PDB violations.
  // 2. A node with minimum highest priority victim is picked.
  // 3. Ties are broken by sum of priorities of all victims.
  // 4. If there are still ties, node with the minimum number of victims is picked.
  // 5. If there are still ties, node with the latest start time of all highest priority victims is picked.
  // 6. If there are still ties, the first such node is picked (sort of randomly).
  ```
), which may leading to the victim pod unschedulable. 

Unless the scheduling pod is also a `pod-per-node` pod.

> 

Reviewer: ok, we could modify the priority to not prefer pods with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` between steps 3 and 4

> 

Author: Shouldn't this go before 3? My understanding is that sum of priorities for nodes having a pod with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` might also be affected by the low number of pods on such nodes. Is this correct?

Also, could it be better to keep the default behavior as is, and to avoid such pods from getting preempted, users should give them a high enough priority to avoid them from getting preempted similar to a regular pod? I am afraid this might end up with lots of special cases hard coded.

> 

Reviewer: > Shouldn't this go before 3? My understanding is that sum of priorities for nodes having a pod with DaemonsetAndStaticPods might also be affected by the low number of pods on such nodes. Is this correct?

Hard to tell, it depends on the range of priorities created.

> Also, could it be better to keep the default behavior as is, and to avoid such pods from getting preempted, users should give them a high enough priority to avoid them from getting preempted similar to a regular pod? I am afraid this might end up with lots of special cases hard coded.

This is just a preference, if they setup the workloads such that those pods have higher priority, then they wouldn't even be considered for preemption at all.

In general, I don't have strong opinion either way, but I wouldn't mind having an explicit preference to avoid preempting those pods first in case they have lower priority than the incoming pod.

> 

Reviewer 5: As I mentioned earlier, I'm just throwing out this potential idea. I'm fine with keep the preemption logic unchanged in alpha (document the behavior is always needed), and see if we can get feedback or real workload data to help us make the current decision on beta.

> 

Reviewer: ok, then just mention that this will not impact preferences on selecting candidate nodes upon preemption.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

> Add a new pod-level API that allows users to specify how many "worker" pods are

Author: I agree this can be rephrased, but the new wording might still be confusing as the API could allow coexistence with other pods. Would it be better stated as
```
Add a new pod-level API that allows users to enforce how a pod can coexist with other pods when scheduled on a node. Available policies are:
- `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`: pod only tolerates daemonset and static pods to be running on the node.
- `Any`: pod tolerates any pod type to be running on the node (default)
```

> Add a new pod-level API that allows users to specify how many "worker" pods are

Reviewer 5: SGTM.

#### Possible Mitigations

-   Cluster admins can use one of the following to prevent users from creating
    daemonsets
    -   [ResourceQuota](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)
        -   Object count quota (`count/daemonsets`) can be used for this
            purpose.
    -   kubernetes
        [RBAC](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/) to
        restrict daemonsets creation to admins/specific users.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The idea is to create a scheduler filter plugin such that given a pod and a
node, a node is filtered out (as in considered no fit for the pod) if any of the
following is true (assume the API is the annotation k8s.io/pod-per-node=true):

-   The incoming pod is not a daemonset pod or static pod (by checking
    OwnerReference) and there is a pod with k8s.io/pod-per-node=true already
    assigned to the node,

> -   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node

Author: I had the understanding that the api-server will set this annotation depending on the API field. Is this incorrect?

> -   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node

Reviewer 5: Nope, once we use a regular API field, we don't need the annotation.

> -   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node

Reviewer: no, there is just one API, just replace the text here with the api we agreed on so far.

> -   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node

Author: Acknowledged, thanks both for the clarification :)

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

-   Allow users to force 1:1 pod-to-node assignment for a given pod.
    -   This is enforced by both scheduler and kubelet.
    -   This feature is implemented as a filter, and so features associated with
        filters applies to it like preemption and autoscaling.

### Non-Goals

-   Find the best fit node for a given pod
-   Avoid pods with `pod.spec.coexistPolicy` field set to
    `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` from getting preempted.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a new pod-level API that allows users to specify how many "worker" pods are
allowed on a node. The API is implemented by the scheduler as a filter plugin
and kubelet as an admission predicate.

> ### User Stories (Optional)

Reviewer 6: This feature will be also useful for running databases on Kubernetes. Sometimes databases need various non-namespaced kernel settings tweaks. eg: https://dbexamstudy.blogspot.com/2021/11/is-kubernetes-slowing-down-my-database.html . But those settings might not be right for other applications in general.

You can imagine a DBaaS running natively on Kubernetes which uses 1:1 Pod / Node assignment where Nodes are sized appropriately for said pod's resource requirements.

Author: @tamalsaha IIUC, this also needs the ability to choose the target node the pod is going to be scheduled on, which is out of scope of this feature. I think `nodeSelector` (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#nodeselector) might be more feasible for this feature as it will schedule pods based on node labels. Please let me know if I misunderstood your use case.

@ahg-g wdyt?

Reviewer 6: nodeselectors will be needed for this use-case but also a way to make sure 2 pods don't get assigned to the same node (pod-affinity can be used for that).

Reviewer: Correct, we still need to ensure 1:1 even with node affinity/selector, nice use case.

Author: I didn't notice earlier that the goal was also to run exclusively on the node. Thanks @tamalsaha for the clarification.

Would the following describe the use case correctly?
```
A user wants a Pod (for stateful workloads) to be scheduled on a node with specific configuration where those settings might not be right for other applications in general. A combination of `nodeSelector`/`node affinity` with 1:1 pod to node assignment can be used to achieve this goal.
```

Reviewer 6: Thanks for summarizing the use-case. LGTM.

Reviewer: I would use the same language Tamal used to describe the use case instead of trying to abstract it too much, it is more relatable when the description is concrete.

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

-   Unit and integration tests passing.
-   Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
-   Benchmark tests showing no performance problems.
-   No user complaints regarding performance/correctness.

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

-   Still no complaints regarding performance.
-   Ensure feature documentation is clear and complete.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

> In the event of a downgrade, the `k8s.io/pod-per-node=true` annotation will be
> ignored even if it was set to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of a downgrade, the coexistPolicy will be ignored even if it was set to DaemonsetAndStaticPods.
```

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.
-->

-   [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>     -   Feature gate name: `PodsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   Feature gate name: `CoexistPolicy`
```

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

It should not impact already running workloads. This is an opt-in feature since
users need to explicitly set the annotation and the API feature in pod spec. If
the feature is disabled, this feature will be silently ignored even if it's
already set.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

-   A spike on metric schedule_attempts_total{result="error|unschedulable"} when
    pods using this feature are added.
-   Metric plugin_execution_duration_seconds{plugin="CoexistPolicy"} larger than
    100ms on 90-percentile.
-   A spike on failure events with keyword "failed CoexistPolicy" in scheduler
    log.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> N/A

Reviewer: it is applicable, but we can do that upon beta graduation.

and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

For pods with `CoexistPolicy` field set to `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`, check that
it is the only pod running on the nodes other than daemonset and static pods.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

-   Metric plugin_execution_duration_seconds{plugin="CoexistPolicy"} <= 100ms on
    90-percentile.
-   Frequency of critical error keywords <= 2 times per minute.

> -   Frequency of regular scheduling failures < 10 times per minute.

Reviewer: remove the last two please

No.

<!--
Look at the [existing SLIs/SLOs].

Think about adding additional work or introducing new steps in between
(e.g. need to do X to start a container), etc. Please describe the details.

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No. <!-- Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased log
volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over network, etc. This
through this both in small and large cases, again with respect to the [supported
limits].

\[supported limits]:
https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->

### Troubleshooting

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

> ###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

Reviewer: no new pods will schedule whether or not the feature is used.

> ###### What are other known failure modes?

Reviewer: None.

<!--
For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:
  - [Failure mode brief description]
    - Detection: How can it be detected via metrics? Stated another way:
      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

> <!--

Reviewer: 2022-01-17: Initial KEP

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

-   Allow users to force 1:1 pod-to-node assignment for a given pod.
    -   This is enforced by both scheduler and kubelet.
    -   This feature is implemented as a filter, and so features associated with
        filters applies to it like preemption and autoscaling.

### Non-Goals

-   Find the best fit node (a.k.a `Score`) from the nodes that satisfy
    `pod.spec.CoexistPolicy`
-   Change node ranking when selecting a candidate for preemption.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a new pod-level API that allows users to enforce how a pod can coexist with
other pods when scheduled on a node. Available policies are:

-   `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`: pod only tolerates daemonset and static pods to be

>     running on the node.

Reviewer: @liggitt @johnbelamaric wdyt?

>     running on the node.

Reviewer 3: I'm fairly uncomfortable about enshrining dameonsets in this way - this is a pretty novel step design wise.  In general, components of the system assuming a specific workload controller has been discouraged or actively rejected historically.

>     running on the node.

Reviewer: A counter argument: k8s matured a lot, and some workload controllers have become pretty standard and enshrined in system designs and cluster setups. It seems reasonable to have special handling for such extremely common apps (daemonsets in this case)?

>     running on the node.

Reviewer: The flexible API exists, it is anti-affinity, and it does support alternative impls; however, with flexibility comes undesired tradeoffs for the most common case. The common case is simply allowing daemonsets and static pods to co-exist with the single workload pod,  having users jump over hoops to set that up (setting up labels correctly for all pods in the cluster or setup taints and tolerations), let alone the performance implications that come with anti-affinity on both the scheduler and CA seems like enough motivation to offer builtin support for daemonsets.

-   `Any`: pod tolerates any pod type to be running on the node (default)

The API is implemented by the scheduler as a filter plugin and kubelet as an
admission predicate.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> A user wants a Pod to be scheduled alone on a node to avoid them from contending

Reviewer 3: So the user wants the pod to be able to consume "all available CPU that is not used by system services"?

I feel like the use case needs a bit more clarification to explain why the particular proposed API is the right fit.

Reviewer: The use case is that the user wants a single workload pod running on the node that consumes all available resources (typically not setting any resource requests on the pod). A common pattern in HPC workloads.

Reviewer: > In those cases aren't we mostly using k8s to schedule another scheduler? - It's not necessarily clear that that's the right api long term

Can you pls clarify? what do you mean by "schedule another scheduler"?

on resources (e.g. claiming all CPU cores available on a node). In other words,
resource intensive workloads are needed to be scheduled on separate nodes.

Example: As a user, I want to deploy a Spark or MPI job such that only a single
worker pod is running on each node.

#### Story 2

> A DBaaS running natively on Kubernetes which uses 1:1 Pod to Node assignment

Reviewer 3: Is the intent here to exclude other pods from that same workload from being colocated?  I.e, the user needs a hard guarantee that pods from workload A are never doubled up, because some resource that kubernetes / linux does not strongly isolate could cause interference?

Same as above, would like a bit more detail.

Reviewer: The intent is to have a single workload pod running on the node, in this case it would be a database server pod. But we still want to allow daemonsets to run (for logging, monitoring etc.)

where Nodes are sized appropriately for said pod's resource requirements. A
combination of `nodeSelector`/`node affinity` with 1:1 pod to node assignment

> can be used to achieve this goal.

Reviewer 3: If you want to exclude on resources, why not create an integer resource that can have a capacity of 1, assign it to all nodes, and then make your workload request one of them?  That handles scheduling and exclusion and the kubelet will even evict if the scheduler races.  Seems like that solves this use case today without any kube changes?

Reviewer: That was my first proposal :) 

The problem with this approach is that all other pods need to request that resource, even the ones that don't require 1:1 scheduling.

-->

Users might be able to circumvent 1:1 pod to node assignments by creating a
daemonset with node affinity to a specific node.

#### Possible Mitigations

-   Cluster admins can use one of the following to prevent users from creating
    daemonsets
    -   [ResourceQuota](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)
        -   Object count quota (`count/daemonsets`) can be used for this
            purpose.
    -   kubernetes
        [RBAC](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/) to
        restrict daemonsets creation to admins/specific users.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The idea is to create a scheduler filter plugin such that given a pod and a
node, a node is filtered out (as in considered no fit for the pod) if any of the
following is true (assume `CoexistPolicy` is set to `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` in
the incoming Pod's podspec):

> -   The incoming pod is not a daemonset pod or static pod (by checking

Reviewer 3: We generally have rejected generic code in kube checking owner reference as a design point (for instance, we declared its usage in `kubectl drain` incorrect and prevented additional constraints from being added to make it clear it was not a pattern we condone).

Reviewer: Interesting, we used that before in the scheduler to lookup parent ReplicaSets of pods for default spreading: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/102179

>     OwnerReference) and there is a pod with

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    OwnerReference) and there is a pod (that is not DaemonSet or Static Pod) with
```

Can static pod or daemonset has this set?

Reviewer: Interesting! If we allow it, a DS pod with this policy would effectively repel any pods other than DS and static. This is similar to pod anti affinity with blank namespace and pod selector, so not really something new. I wouldn't explicitly disallow it (other than having a quota scope to limit which namespaces can use CoexistPolicy)

Reviewer 7: I'd suggest to write it down explicitly so there is no assumption of the desired behavior

Reviewer 8: +1. If this isn't supported it should probably also be a validation check on pod submit (for DS Pods)

    `CoexistPolicy`=`DaemonsetAndStaticPods` already assigned to the node,
-   If the incoming pod has `CoexistPolicy`=`DaemonsetAndStaticPods` and the
    node hosts at least one regular pod (neither daemonset pod nor static pod).

> -   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet

Reviewer: @swatisehgal CoexistPolicy is like most other fields in the pod spec (e.g. node affinity), it is immutable; and so there is nothing special in this filter that warrants a different behavior to what we have right now for the other scheduler-related admission checks that kubelet does. It would simply be added to the following function: 

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/lifecycle/predicate.go#L273

If I tell you that kubelet admission will be exactly the same as for node affinity, would that answer your questions above?

> -   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet

Reviewer 9: Thanks for the clarification.

Yes, your explanation answers my question.

> -   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet

Reviewer 9: Can you please add this information in the KEP as well.

- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

Unit and integration tests verifying the following

-   a single pod is assigned to a node while allowing daemonsets and static
    pods.
-   scheduler doesn't schedule new pods to a node that already have a pod with
    `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy.
-   Daemonset and static pods can be scheduled to a node that has a pod with
    `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy.
-   kubelet rejects a pod if it was assigned directly to a node already running
    a pod with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` policy
-   the API is no-op if feature gate is turned off

> Benchmark Tests

Reviewer 7: this will not be worse than inter-pod anti-affinity, but I feel that there something can be validated on how the update will work for such pods. If pod is being updated as part of the ReplicaSet, and it takes some time to be torn down, would we ever want to allow scheduling on the same Node while the pod is being shutdown? Also it would be nice to prevent races when some other pod is scheduled on the Node blocking the updated pod with `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` be scheduled on that same node.

Reviewer: I don't think we want to bake any logic specific to this feature regarding the two issues below. 

> would we ever want to allow scheduling on the same Node while the pod is being shutdown?

As long as the pod is not yet deleted, it will be taken into account. Similar to how we deal with normal resources like cpu and memory for pods shutting down.

> Also it would be nice to prevent races when some other pod is scheduled on the Node blocking the updated pod with DaemonsetAndStaticPods be scheduled on that same node.

If the pod with DaemonsetAndStaticPods has higher priority, it will kick out the other pods that raced into the node while the replicaset is being updated, otherwise the node is fair game for other pods.

Reviewer 7: yes, I understand how it works. But since this repellent condition is super strong I wonder if any adjustments might be made to simplify rollout updates. Kicking off other pods will be quite long operation. Thinking more about it, I guess in many scenarios nodes will be specially marked to handle these DaemonsetAndStaticPods pods. And other pods may be repelled from them.

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> This Kep proposes adding a feature (`PodsPerNodeAssignmentPolicy`) that provides

Author: Sorry for missing those out :(

        restrict daemonsets creation to admins/specific users.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The idea is to create a scheduler filter plugin such that given a pod and a
node, a node is filtered out (as in considered no fit for the pod) if any of the
following is true (assume `CoexistPolicy` is set to `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` in
the incoming Pod's podspec):

-   The incoming pod is not a daemonset pod or static pod (by checking
    OwnerReference) and there is a pod with k8s.io/pod-per-node=true already
    assigned to the node,
-   If the incoming pod has the k8s.io/pod-per-node=true annotation and the node
    hosts at least one regular pod (neither daemonset pod nor static pod).
-   The above logic would also be added to the set of predicates that kubelet
    tests on pod admission. This will prevent users from working around the

>     scheduler to avoid 1:1 enforcement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    scheduler to avoid coexist policy enforcement.
```

> -   If no Node was found that satisfies 1:1 pod to node assignment of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   If no Node was found that satisfies the filter for the
```

    incoming pod,
    [Pod Preemption](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#preemption)

>     will evict lower priority pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    may evict lower priority pods to satisfy the coexist policy of the incoming pod.
```

The annotation is not a proper API, so the next section proposes what the API

> should look like in the pod spec.

Reviewer: remove this paragraph

> ### Introduce a new API Field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API
```

> A new API field `pod.spec.coexistPolicy` could be introduced to be used by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new API field `pod.spec.coexistPolicy` is introduced to be used by the
```

> new filter. The value for the newly introduced field could be an enum that has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new filter. The value for the newly introduced field is an enum that has
```

one of the following values: `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`, `Any` (Default) where
`Any` is the same as the current behaviour and `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` would
allow placing only a single pod on a node excluding daemonset and static pods,
effectively enforcing 1:1 workload pod to node mapping.

```yaml
...
spec:
  coexistPolicy: <string>
```

This API will look as follows in Golang

```go
type PodSpec struct {

>   // CoexistPolicy specifies what other pods this pod can "coexist" with. It is similar to pod anti-affinity but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // CoexistPolicy specifies which other pods this pod can "coexist" with. It is similar to pod anti-affinity but
```

>   // limited to node topology and doesn't operate on pod labels, and so more performant but has limited use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // limited to node topology and doesn't operate on pod labels, and so more performant but has narrow use
```

### Introduce a new API Field

A new API field `pod.spec.coexistPolicy` could be introduced to be used by the
new filter. The value for the newly introduced field could be an enum that has
one of the following values: `DaemonsetAndStaticPods`, `Any` (Default) where
`Any` is the same as the current behaviour and `DaemonsetAndStaticPods` would

> enforce 1:1 pod to node mapping during scheduling of a given pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow placing only a single pod on a node excluding daemonset and static pods, effectively enforcing 1:1 workload pod to node mapping.
```
